GH-3902: Add Kotlin Coroutines Support (#3905)
spring-projects/spring-integration: src/reference/asciidoc/kotlin-functions.adoc

[[kotlin-functions-support]]
=== Kotlin Support

The Framework also has been improved to support Kotlin lambdas for functions, so now you can use a combination of the Kotlin language and Spring Integration flow definitions:

====
[source, kotlin]
----
@Bean
@Transformer(inputChannel = "functionServiceChannel")
fun kotlinFunction(): (String) -> String {
    return { it.toUpperCase() }
}

@Bean
@ServiceActivator(inputChannel = "messageConsumerServiceChannel")
fun kotlinConsumer(): (Message<Any>) -> Unit {
    return { print(it) }
}

@Bean
@InboundChannelAdapter(value = "counterChannel",
        poller = Poller(fixedRate = "10", maxMessagesPerPoll = "1"))
fun kotlinSupplier(): () -> String {
    return { "baz" }
}
----
====

[[kotlin-coroutines]]
==== Kotlin Coroutines

Starting with version 6.0, Spring Integration provides support for https://kotlinlang.org/docs/coroutines-guide.html[Kotlin Coroutines].

> Now the `suspend` functions and `kotlinx.coroutines.Deferred` & `kotlinx.coroutines.flow.Flow` return types can be used for service methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now `suspend` functions and `kotlinx.coroutines.Deferred` & `kotlinx.coroutines.flow.Flow` return types can be used for service methods:
```

====
[source, kotlin]
----
@ServiceActivator(inputChannel = "suspendServiceChannel", outputChannel = "resultChannel")
suspend fun suspendServiceFunction(payload: String) = payload.uppercase()

@ServiceActivator(inputChannel = "flowServiceChannel", outputChannel = "resultChannel", async = "true")
fun flowServiceFunction(payload: String) =
    flow {
        for (i in 1..3) {
            emit("$payload #$i")
        }
    }
----
====

The framework treats them as Reactive Streams interactions and uses `ReactiveAdapterRegistry` to convert to respective `Mono` and `Flux` reactor types.
Such a function reply is processed then in the reply channel, if it is a `ReactiveStreamsSubscribableChannel`, or as a result of `CompletableFuture` in the respective callback.

NOTE: The functions with `Flow` result are not `async` by default on the `@ServiceActivator`, so `Flow` instance is produced as a reply message payload.

> It is already target application to process this object as a coroutine or convert it to `Flux`, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is the target application's responsibility to process this object as a coroutine or convert it to `Flux`, respectively.
```

The `@MessagingGateway` interface methods also can be marked with a `suspend` modifier when declared in Kotlin.

> The framework utilizes a `Mono` logic internally to perform request-reply for downstream flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The framework utilizes a `Mono` internally to perform request-reply using the downstream flow.
```
